---
layout: 2018f_w4995
---

# Assignment 4: Final Project
<br>

The purpose of the final project is to give you an opportunity to develop an original visualization design, method, algorithm, or tool. In teams of 3-4, your project should address a meaningful visualization problem and present a novel solution. The final deliverable should be published on Observable accompanied by a significant written portion. You are encouraged but not required, to include an evaluation component (e.g. user testing) in your project.

Unlike previous assignments, this assignment has multiple due dates. Your final assignment grade will be cumulative.

### 4.1: Project Proposal

Find your team members, do research, make sketches, and do some exploratory analysis to decide on the visualization problem you want to tackle.

Write a 500-word proposal describing your plan. Include screenshots and images as needed to communicate your ideas. Make sure your proposal covers:

-   Hypotheses and questions you intend to explore.
-   Why you think this topic is relevant or impactful beyond this class.
-   What will be your original contribution? (e.g. interactivity, visual design, algorithm, narrative, or a combination.)
-   Description of how you plan to address the task (e.g. data processing, background topic research, advanced D3 techniques, interactivity or narrative approach, code performance, etc.) Be specific.
-   Links to specific data sources you intend to use.
-   Reference to at least three prior works (projects which you will build upon, or which inspired your ideas.)
-   A week-by-week timeline with one sentence each describing how you will share the work.

If for any reason, you foresee that Observable will pose a limitation to your final project concept, make sure to describe this in your proposal.

Submit your proposal in the form of a [PDF file or Google Doc url](https://goo.gl/forms/2GKkP5AnN4afmbRL2) for A4.1, by *Monday 10/29, 11:59pm*.

### 4.2: In-Progress critique

Present your final project plan and any design and development work thus far for in-class critique on 11/13. A panel of 3-4 external guests active in the field will be invited to critique and help you improve your project. Prepare to present for 5 min., with 7 min. for critique and discussion.

Your presentation should be polished, but because this is a great (and possibly your best) opportunity for feedback, you are encouraged to discuss ideas or alternatives you are still considering, rather than decisions you've already made. Make sure you give your critics enough context (i.e. prior decisions and what you're trying to achieve) to give you helpful input.

Example presentation outline:
- motivation and hypotheses
- relevant prior work
- 3 or more exploratory viz (e.g. Tableau, R, matplotlib) to illustrate your analysis findings
- 1-sentence "data story" you'd like readers of your viz to take away (knowing what you do post-analysis)
- 1 initial/static/rough viz in code (e.g. D3)
- sketches/wireframes of how your final page will look (e.g. pen/paper, illustrator, iPad drawings, etc.)
- feedback: 3 specific questions you'd like help with

Submit your group's [PDF file or Google Slides url](https://goo.gl/forms/2GKkP5AnN4afmbRL2) for A4.2, by *Monday 11/12, 11:59pm*.

### Final Deliverables

In your final Observable notebook, lead with your interactive visualization, including any introductory or narrative elements that may be part of its presentation.

Below it, your final write-up should be between 500-800 words and should include the following elements (you need not label or divide your sections exactly thus, e.g. if you choose to build a more narrative visualization):

-   **Introduction** -- An explanation of the problem and the motivation for solving it.
-   **Related Work** -- A description of prior work or research related to your project.
-   **Methodology** -- An explanation of the techniques and algorithms you used or developed.
-   **Discussion** -- What has the audience learned from your work? What new insights or practices has your system enabled? A full blown user study is not expected, but informal observations of use that help evaluate your system are encouraged.
-   **Future Work** -- A description of how your system could be extended or refined.
-   **Acknowledgements or Footnotes**

Submit your group's [final Observable url](https://goo.gl/forms/2GKkP5AnN4afmbRL2) and individually, your [peer assessments](https://goo.gl/forms/YIwbN6nTnEtHZlTD2) for all of A5, by *Monday 12/3, 11:59pm*.

### Grading Criteria

We're looking for:
-  novelty of concept
-  engaging, relevant, or impactful data insights
-  interaction techniques fitting to the task
-  effective multi-view coordination
-  thoughtful and elegant graphic design

We'd also love to see:
-   advanced interaction techniques
-   novel visualization elements
-   engaging narrative design

Make sure you do not have:
-   errors or broken features
-   confusing or ineffective visual encodings
-   confusing interface design or unhelpful interactions (note that poor code performance can sometimes lead to confusing interactions)
-   incomplete or poor writing
